hiraṇyākṣaṃ tāvadvarada bhavadanveṣaṇaparaṃ
carantaṃ sāṃvarte payasi nijajaṅghāparimite |
bhavadbhakto gatvā kapaṭapaṭudhīrnāradamuni:
śanairūce nandan danujamapi nindaṃstava balam ||1||
hiraṇyākṣam tāvat-	to Hiranyaaksha, then
varada	O Bestower of boons!
bhavat-aṇveṣaṇaparam	who was searching for Thee (and)
carantam sāṃvarte payasi	who was running around in the waters of deluge
nija-jaṅghā-parimite	which was reaching his thighs
bhavat-bhakta: gatvā	Thy devotee approaching (Hiranyaaksha)
kapaṭapaṭudhī:-nāradamuni:	Naarada muni who was a diplomatic missionary
śanai:-ūce	calmly spoke (to Hiranyaaksha)
nandan danujam-api	pleasing the Asura
nindan-tava balam	and denigrating Thy prowess
O Bestower of Boons! Then Thy devotee, the sage Naarada who is skillfully diplomatic in furthering Thy purposes, approached Hiranyaaksha, who was running about searching for Thee, in the cosmic waters which barely reached his knees. Naarada calmly spoke to him, praising him and undermining Thy prowess.
sa māyāvī viṣṇurharati bhavadīyāṃ vasumatīṃ
prabho kaṣṭaṃ kaṣṭaṃ kimidamiti tenābhigadita: |
nadan kvāsau kvāsaviti sa muninā darśitapatho
bhavantaṃ samprāpaddharaṇidharamudyantamudakāt ||2||
sa: māyāvī viṣṇu:-	"that deceitful Vishnu
harati bhavadīyāṃ vasumatīṃ	is stealing away your own earth
prabho	O Mighty One!
kaṣṭaṃ kaṣṭaṃ kim-idam-iti	what a pity, how is it so", thus
tena-abhigadita:	by him (Naarada) was said
nadan kva-asau	roaring "Where is he
kva-asau-iti	where is he", thus
sa muninā	he (the Asura) by the Muni
darśita-patha:	was shown the way
bhavantaṃ samprāpat-	reached Thee
dharaṇi-dharam-	(Thee who was) holding up the earth
udyantam-udakāt	coming up from the waters
When Naarada told the mighty Hiranyaaksh that the deceitful Vishnu was stealing away his own earth and how was it so , Hiranyaaksha with a roar asked where he was, where he was. Thus, following the direction given by the sage, he reached Thee, as Thou were rising up from the waters with the earth.
aho āraṇyo'yaṃ mṛga iti hasantaṃ bahutarai-
rduruktairvidhyantaṃ ditisutamavajñāya bhagavan |
mahīṃ dṛṣṭvā daṃṣṭrāśirasi cakitāṃ svena mahasā
payodhāvādhāya prasabhamudayuṅkthā mṛdhavidhau ||3||
aho āraṇya:-ayaṃ mṛga	"O this is only a wild animal"
iti hasantaṃ	thus ridiculing with
bahutarai:-duruktai:-vidhyantaṃ	and many abuses lashing out
ditisutam-	the son of Diti (the Asura)
avajñāya bhagavan	ignoring (Thee) O Lord
mahīṃ dṛṣṭvā	seeing the earth
daṃṣṭrāśirasi	at the tip of the tusks
cakitāṃ	(the earth) trembling
svena mahasā	by Thy power
payodhau-ādhāya	(then) placing (the earth) in the ocean
prasabham-	at once
udayuṅkthā	(Thou) did prepare
mṛdhavidhau	for a fight
O Lord! Thou ignored the ridiculing words of the Asura that this is only a wild animal and the many abuses hurled by him. Thou saw the earth trembling in fear at the tip of Thy tusk and so placed her firmly on the ocean by Thy power. Then Thou at once were ready for a fight.
gadāpāṇau daitye tvamapi hi gṛhītonnatagado
niyuddhena krīḍan ghaṭaghaṭaravodghuṣṭaviyatā |
raṇālokautsukyānmilati surasaṅghe drutamamuṃ
nirundhyā: sandhyāta: prathamamiti dhātrā jagadiṣe ||4||
gadāpāṇau daitye	the Asura armed with a mace
tvam-api hi	Thou also indeed
gṛhīta-unnta-gada:	flourishing a mighty mace
niyuddhena krīḍan	by a dual (fight) as though sporting (the clashing of maces)
ghaṭa-ghaṭa-rava-udghuṣṭa-viyatā	resounding the sky with fierce sound
raṇa-āloka-autsukyāt-	with the eagerness to see the fight
milati surasaṅghe	when the hosts of gods assembled
drutam-amum nirundhyā:	quickly kill this (Asura)
sandhyāta: prathamam-	before evening
iti dhātrā jagadiṣe	thus Thou were requested by Brahmaa
As the Asura was armed with a mace, Thou too flourished a mighty mace and sportingly gave him battle. As the clang of the clashing maces resounded in the sky, the hosts of gods assembled eagerly to see the dual. Brahmaa cried out requesting Thee to kill the Asura before nightfall.
gadonmarde tasmiṃstava khalu gadāyāṃ ditibhuvo
gadāghātādbhūmau jhaṭiti patitāyāmahaha! bho: |
mṛdusmerāsyastvaṃ danujakulanirmūlanacaṇaṃ
mahācakraṃ smṛtvā karabhuvi dadhāno ruruciṣe ||5||
gadonmarde tasmin-	in that fight with the maces
tava khalu gadāyāṃ	(when) Thy mace indeed
ditibhuva:	(and) of the Asura's
gadā-ghātāt-	by a blow of the mace
bhūmau jhaṭiti patitāyām-	on the ground suddenly fell
ahaha bho:	what a wonder O Lord!
mṛdusmera-āsya:-tvam	with a gentle smile on Thy face, Thou
danujakula-nirmūlacaṇam	famous as the destroyer of the entire Asura race
mahācakram smṛtvā	(that) great discus invoking (Sudarshana)
karabhuvi dadhāno	in the palms of Thy hands holding
ruruciṣe	looked magnificent
During that combat, the Asura's stroke suddenly knocked down Thy mace to the ground. With a smile on Thy face Thou invoked Thy discus (Sudarshana) which is well known for slaying of the race of the Asuras. Thou looked magnificent as the invoked discus placed itself in Thy hands.
tata: śūlaṃ kālapratimaruṣi daitye visṛjati
tvayi chindatyenat karakalitacakrapraharaṇāt |
samāruṣṭo muṣṭyā sa khalu vitudaṃstvāṃ samatanot
galanmāye māyāstvayi kila jaganmohanakarī: ||6||
tata: śūlam	then, a trident
kālapratim-aruṣi daitye	angry like Rudra the Destroyer, when the Asura
visṛjati	threw (the trident)
tvayi chindati-	Thou broke
enat	this (trident)
kara-kalita-cakra-praharaṇāt	by the blow of the discus held in Thy hand
samāruṣṭa:	greatly enraged
muṣṭyā sa khalu	with (his) fist he indeed
vitudan-tvām	hitting Thee
samatanot galanmāye	did employ against Thee, who are beyond, the effects of Maya
māyā: tvayi kila	Maaya on Thee indeed
jagat-mohanakarī:	(Maya) whose tricks can deceive the whole world
The Asura who was angry as the Destroyer Rudra, threw his trident at Thee, and Thou broke it with the discus in Thy hands.Greatly enraged he hit Thee with his fist and also employed tricks of Maya against Thee,which may deceive the whole world but does not effect Thee who are above all Maya.
bhavaccakrajyotiṣkaṇalavanipātena vidhute
tato māyācakre vitataghanaroṣāndhamanasam |
gariṣṭhābhirmuṣṭiprahṛtibhirabhighnantamasuraṃ
svapādāṅguṣṭhena śravaṇapadamūle niravadhī: ||7||
bhavat-cakra-jyotiṣ-kaṇa-lava-nipātena	being hit by a powerful spark of Thy divine discus
vidhute	were destroyed
tata: māyā-cakre	then (when) the illusion created by the Asura
vitata-ghana-roṣa-andha-manasam	whose mind was blinded by intense rage
gariṣṭhābhi:-muṣṭi-prahṛtibhi:-	with strong blows of his fist
abhighnantam-asuram	the Asura who was hitting Thee
sva-pāda-aṅuguṣṭhena	with Thy big toe
śravaṇa-pada-mūle	at the base of (his) ear
niravadhī:	Thou did strike
When the illusions created by the Asura were all dispersed being hit by a powerful spark of Thy divine discus, the Asura's mind was overcome by intense rage. He then attacked Thee with strong blows of his heavy fists, whereupon Thou struck him with a powerful blow with Thy big toe at the base of his ear.
mahākāya: so॓'yaṃ tava caraṇapātapramathito
galadrakto vaktrādapatadṛṣibhi: ślāghitahati: |
tadā tvāmuddāmapramadabharavidyotihṛdayā
munīndrā: sāndrābhi: stutibhiranuvannadhvaratanum ||8||
mahākāya: sa:-ayam	that Asura of gigantic proportions
tava caraṇa-pāta-pramathita:	by the blow of Thy foot crushed
galat-rakta: vaktrāt-	with blood flowing out of his mouth
apatat-	fell
ṛṣibhi: ślāghita-hati:	the sages praised his slaying
tadā tvām-	then to Thee
uddāma-pramadabhara-vidyoti-hṛdayā	with their hearts full and brimming with joy
munīndrā:	the great sages
sāndrābhi: stutibhi:-	with verses full of deep meaning
anuvan-	praised
adhvara-tanum	O Thou! The Embodiment of Yajna
That gigantic Asura crushed by the powerful blow of Thy foot, fell down with blood flowing out of his mouth. The sages praised his slaying. O Thou! Who are the embodiment of Yajna! As they did so their hearts were full and brimming with joy. They sang hymns with deep meaning.
tvaci chando romasvapi kuśagaṇaścakṣuṣi ghṛtaṃ
caturhotāro'ṅghrau srugapi vadane codara iḍā |
grahā jihvāyāṃ te parapuruṣa karṇe ca camasā
vibho somo vīryaṃ varada galadeśe'pyupasada: ||9||
tvaci chanda:	in Thy skin are the Vedic Metres
romasu-api kuśagaṇa:-	Thy hair are the Kush grass
cakṣuṣi ghṛtam	Thy eyes are ghee
caturhotāra:-aṅghrau	Thy feet are the four sacrificing priests
srug-api vadane	Thy face is 'sruk' (the ladle used for offering)
ca-udara iḍā	and Thy stomach the 'ida' (the vessel used for keeping the ingredients for offering)
grahā jihvāyāṃ te	Thy tongue the soma pot
parapuruṣa	O Infinite Lord!
karṇe ca camasā	Thy ears are the chamasas (vessel used for keeping the sacrificial remnants)
vibho	O Lord!
somo vīryam	Thy virility is Soma
varada	O Bestower of Boons!
galadeśe-api-upasada:	in Thy neck are the sacrifices called 'Upasat' (the subsidiary rites)
O Infinite Lord! In Thy skin are the Vedic Mantras, Thy hair are the 'kush' grass, Thy eyes are the ghee, Thy feet are the four sacrificing priests, Thy face is 'sruk',( the ladle for sacrifice) and Thy stomach is the 'Ida' (the vessel which holds the sacrificial ingredients), Thy tongue is the soma pot. O Lord! Thy ears are the chamasas (the vessel which holds the sacrificial remnants) and Thy virility is soma. O Bestower of Boons! in Thy neck are the sacrifices called Upasat, (the subsidiary rites). Thou are the embodiment of the holy Yagna.
munīndrairityādistavanamukharairmoditamanā
mahīyasyā mūrtyā vimalatarakīrtyā ca vilasan |
svadhiṣṇyaṃ samprāpta: sukharasavihārī madhuripo
nirundhyā rogaṃ me sakalamapi vātālayapate ||10||
munīndrai:-ityādi-	by the various great sages
stavana-mukharai:-modita-manā	who were intoning such hymns,
modita-manā	being delighted
mahīyasyā mūrtyā	with a splendid form and
vimalatara-kīrtyā ca	with unblemished glory
vilasan	shining
svadhiṣṇyaṃ samprāpta:	reaching Thy abode of Vaikunth
sukha-rasa-vihārī	O Thee! Reveling in Thy own Bliss!
madhuripo	O Destroyer of Madhu!
nirundhyā rogam me	destroy ailments of mine
sakalam-api	all of them
vātālayapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Destroyer of Madhu! Delighted with the hymns of the sages Thou shone with Thy huge and adorable form and taintless glory and retired to Thy abode of Vaikunth, revelling in Thy innate Bliss. May Thou be pleased to eradicate all my ailments.